---
layout: post
title: "Demystifying Bitcoin (PART 1 - Introduction)"
categories: blog
share: true
comment: true
tags: [Bitcoin]
---

Last week i came across a book [**Understanding Bitcoin** by Pedro Franco](http://www.amazon.in/Understanding-Bitcoin-Cryptography-Engineering-Economics/dp/1119019168). This post shares that knowledge and is intended for those people who want to understand Bitcoin better.

## 1. Prologue

Here is some interesting conversation between two guys.

{% highlight java %}

A: What is Bitcoin?
B: A digital Currency.
A: And who controls it?
B: Nobody.
A: What? There must be somebody controlling it.
B: Nope. It is an algorithm.
A: Now you are confusing me. Tell me is it a currency or algorithm?
B: Both. 
A: OK then, who controls the Algorithm?
B: Nobody. It is open source.
A: Ahh..open source. Then i can make my own Bitcoins, right?. I'll become Bill Gates of Digital world.
B: Easy boy... you can't mint your own Bitcoins but you can invent your own currency.
A: But what value Bitcoins will have when anybody can create his own currency?
B: Currencies have values because of social convention, consensual agreement (or hallucination). Same goes for Euros, Dollars and Bitcoin.
A: Well.. Now you have all my attention. Please tell me more :)

{% endhighlight %}

### What Bitcoin is not 

* A Currency issued by an institution
* A Ponzi Scheme 
* A physical memory 
* A currency backed by silver / gold

### What Bitcoin is 

* An idea / Algorithm
* An open source project 
* A distributed peer-to-peer digital currency.
* A distributed transaction database.

### Decentralized 

Most currencies like Euro and Dollar are Fiat currencies controlled by government or semi-government institutes like banks while Bitcoin is based on peer-to-peer network of computers running the software. These computers are called nodes.

Bitcoin's decentralized nature contrasts to the structure of fiat currencies. Central banks make money decisions, regulate money flowing in market thereby influencing inflation. Control in peer-to-peer network is more subtle because these changes have to be agreed by majority of peers at least thereby make discretionary decisions almost impossible.

Another important aspect of decentralized systems are that they are robust and more resilient to any attack. This might be the reason of continuous survival of Bitcoin. 

 > The main technological breakthrough accomplished by Bitcoin is solving the double spending problem in distributed financial database.

### Open Source

### Public Asset Ledger

 * The heart of Bitcoin is a distributed database that holds a copy of common asset ledge. Every node retains a copy of this database.
 * All the information following through Bitcoin network is public. This is like making everyone's bank statement public with their names removed.

### It is not only a currency, It is a technology.

> Bitcoin is an API (Application Programming Interface) for money and bitcoin the currency is just the first application.

* Consider a use case when a computer program can open an account in a bank. This is possible using Bitcoin. Consider a autonomous agent (computer program) in cloud which charges its customers by allowing them space in cloud storage or similar technologies charging bitcoins for its service.

## 2. Technology

* Being a distributed peer-to-peer cryptocurrency Bitcoin is similar to BitTorrent in many ways which is peer-to-peer file sharing.
* Bitcoin identifies its user by Bitcoin identifiers which is a large string of letters and numbers like "13mckXcnnEd4SEkC27PnFH8dsY2gdGhRvM"
* Bitcoin addresses are not generated by network. They are created on user's device when it runs the Bitcoin software that generates the  cryptographic public and private key.
* There is no restriction on number of address a user can generate. Indeed it is recommended users generate many addresses to enhance privacy.
* No prior registration is necessary to use Bitcoin. In fact a person can send his Bitcoin address to receive funds via other communication medium like email.

### Distributed Database, The Blockchain

* Bitcoin's distributed database is called blockchain.
* Transactions are grouped in block of transactions roughly every 10 minutes.
* The block of transactions are recorded one after other in a chain of blocks, hence the name **blockChain**.
* Block are linked to create a record history of transactions that can not be altered.
* Link between blocks is a cryptographic link that cannot be forged unless attacker has vast computational power.
* Apart from blockchain, nodes keep one additional database called Unspent Transaction Output Cache (UTXO) which is a ledger that records the funds available for every address.
* The pace of new bitcoins issuances is halved every four years and it is estimated that total number of bitcoins will reach roughly 21 millions.
* A attacker needs vast amount of computational power to crack bockchain.

> Source and compiled binaries can be downloaded from [**bitcoin.org/en/download**](https://bitcoin.org/en/download)

### Wallets 

Bitcoin wallets is a software that helps a user manage her funds, create new addresses, holds user's private keys, create transactions that are sent to network, collect incoming and outgoing transactions, to show the balance of available funds, aggregate many accounts if user has more than one account.

> Always use open source implementation of bitcoin wallet. Open source implementation reduces risk of hidden backdoors inside code.

## 3. Bitcoin Economics

### Pros and Cons of Bitcoin as Medium of Exchange 

* Bitcoin users are **not at risk of security breaches** as long as they keep their private key safe but critics argue that web wallets and exchanges are equally prone to security breaches.
* Bitcoin's transaction **fees are lower** than credit cards' fees.
* Merchants using Bitcoin are **protected from charge-back fraud**, i.e customer looking for a retraction of payment when goods have been delivered.
* Bitcoin transfers are almost **instantaneous** compared to bank transfers which may take hours or days. However payment methods, such as credit card have almost similar transfer time as Bitcoin.
* No base fees are collected using Bitcoin unlike credit cards which could enable micro-payments.
* Bitcoin or sister technologies can enable ** transfer of any digital assets** apart from being an currency.
* Bitcoin’s payments can either be more anonymous or less anonymous than traditional payment methods. Increased anonymity comes from the use of pseudonyms. Decreased privacy comes from the fact that if an attacker could figure out the address corresponding to a user, then the attacker could have access to the user’s complete financial information.
* Bitcoin is **illiquid** as compared to fiat currencies.
* Bitcoin **transactions do not offer a credit option**.
* Bitcoin could face **scalability pressure** is its use is generalized.

> It is believed that most of bitcoins are possessed by early adopters in dormant accounts as Investment.

### Bitcoin as Investment 

> The risk / reward profile of investing in Bitcoin resembles an investment in high risk startup more than an investment in stable store value.

AS with early stage startups, there is some probability that Bitcoin will grow to capture a significant market share of payment market and there is some probability that it will fail and value of investment will go to zero.

Some possible scenarios under which Bitcoin may fail:

* A serious security flaw is found which leads to massive hacking and therefore undermining trust in Bitcoin.
* A competing technology like alt-coin or meta-coin or some other payment platform from some other big companies replaces it.
* Bitcoin has no value in third world where electricity and network connectivity is still a problem.

### Pros

* Bitcoin avoids **confiscation, capital controls or disproportionate taxation**.
* There are **no storage costs**.
* Bitcoins are **easy to transport**.
* Bitcoin uses **cryptographic security.**
* Bitcoin provides **automatic record keeping.**
* Bitcoin is **deflationary**.

### Cons 

* Bitcoin is open source therefore it can be replicated easily and legally thereby creating a competition in many cryptocurrencies.
* Critics argue that Bitcoin cannot be used as a store of value because of its volatility.
* There is no control over the money supply. 
* Cryptocurrencies do not have legal tender status.
* Governments could ban the use of cryptocurrencies.
* Bitcoins have no physical backing.
* In contrast to bank deposits, there is no deposit insurance for Bitcoin users.

### Deflation 

* The path of monetary supply of new bitcoins is programmed into Bitcoin’s source code.The maximum number of bitcoins issued will eventually reach approximately 21 million. This fixed money supply makes it deflationary.
* Furthermore, bitcoins are withdrawn from circulation due to their owners losing the private keys. As of the time of writing, an estimated 4% of bitcoins in circulation have been lost.

## Bitcoin Business Applications

* Money transfer
* Bitcoin Exchanges
* Web Wallets
* Mining
* Bitcoin ATMs






















